Q: Carlos, that must be mixed emotions. After the first start, it looked like it was game over. You got a little lucky being able to start again and you came away with a podium.
Carlos SAINZ: Yeah, it was a tight one and obviously a very bad feeling there in lap one that very quickly turned into a very good feeling after getting reinstated at P3. From there on, really, the race pace was good, as we expected. It's just impossible to get past through the streets of Monaco. But I'm extremely happy to see Charles win his home Grand Prix. The way he's been driving all weekend and managed to share this podium with him in P3. It's a great feeling for the whole team. I think they all deserve it. And yeah, it looks like we're getting stronger and stronger every weekend.
 
Q: It looked like towards the end of the race you were getting closer to Oscar. I don't know if his tyres started opening up or he was struggling with him a bit, but you were given the pressure there.
CS: Yeah, once I was sure that Lando behind didn’t have a gap to pit for Medium and attack me at the end, I focused on doing some fast laps. I went down to the 1m14s, which was really quick at the time, and I said, OK, maybe I have a chance at putting a bit of pressure on Oscar, and maybe I can get him to do a mistake, because obviously I knew that passing him was impossible. And, yeah, we got him under pressure. I saw him lose the rear a couple of times and getting a bit loose, but it was not enough to pass.


Q: Alright. Thank you for that. Carlos, let's come to you now. Your third Monaco podium in the last four years. What does this one mean to you?
CS: I think it means more for the fact that being a Ferrari driver, being P3, but especially seeing your team-mate that is Monegasque standing on top of the podium in front of his home crowd, in front of all the tifosi and all the mechanics, I think it's one of the best images I've seen in Formula 1 and extremely happy for him, for the team. He deserves it because he's driven at an incredible level this weekend and he's put together a really solid weekend. And yeah, it was coming for him, I felt, because he was driving really well recently. Yeah, it's a really good day for Ferrari and Charles.
 
Q: Can I take you back to the original start now? Oscar touched on the incident between the two of you. Can we get your thoughts on what happened at the original Turn 1?
CS: Yeah, I got a really good start and I had kind of an opportunity going into Turn 1 and I arrived a bit long, with a lot of understeer in the car and trying to keep the position with Oscar, as it's pretty much your only chance to pass. Then I understeered off a bit into him on the exit and yeah, we had the slightest of contacts. For some reason, Oscar and I, we seem to have a magnet recently between each other, for some reason that I don't understand, because we get on well and everything is okay, but we seem to always find each other on track. Yeah, I didn't even feel the contact. It was so slight or it was so small that I didn't even see it or feel it. But as soon as I exit Turn 1, I could feel the puncture. And yeah, it looked like my race was over there at one point. And then I was really lucky to get the P3 back and race from there the rest of the race.
 
Q: Was there any lasting damage on your car or were the team able to completely fix any issues in the break?
CS: No, even when you see the tyre, it was such a slight cut that the tyre got from the contact that there was no issues with the car, no damage. It was just the smallest of contacts. A bit unlucky to get the puncture in a way, but then lucky to get the position back. From there on, honestly, it was a new race and we had our opportunities, but never really a clear one.
 
Q: How frustrating is it, Carlos, to be in a train of cars like that, lapping slower than you're capable of going? Did you get tempted to send it down the inside of Oscar?
CS: I got tempted a few times, but after lap one and obviously knowing that Monaco is a bit of all-or-nothing, you know that when you go for a move, the most likely outcome is contact between the two cars and a potential DNF for the two cars. And I felt like that was too much to lose for both Oscar and myself, you know, and my team. So unfortunately, Monaco is like that. I did have my opportunities and my temptations, both in the first 15 laps and in the last 10 laps, but never really a clear chance to see how we could get out of the corner untouched. So, yeah, as I knew from Friday, my race pace was going to be good. I was the fastest on Friday practice in terms of race pace. Again, today, when I could show the pace, it was really, really good. But Monaco is track position and we lost it to Oscar yesterday.
 
Q: And let's throw it forward now. Ferrari are just 24 points behind Red Bull in the Constructors' Championship. Do you think this is a genuine title fight now? Do you think you have the car underneath you to challenge every weekend?
CS: I think my common sense tells me that on normal tracks Red Bull should still be favourites. Domination, like we were seeing, hopefully not. But favourites, yes. And then it will be a very tight fight with both McLaren and us. I think we are all three at a very similar level. Our last reference of a normal track is Imola and Miami. And if I see those two tracks, we seem to be half a tenth behind McLaren and maybe a tenth or two behind Red Bull. And yeah, it still means that that any small progress, any small upgrade, any small thing that we bring to the car might switch it to a potential race victory or a winning car. Monaco, we've always been strong. Street circuits like Singapore and last year in Monaco, it shows the strengths of the Ferrari. And at the same time, being within 24 points of the Red Bull in the Constructors, you see that when you put them under pressure yesterday, Max did a mistake in Q3 run two, Checo was out in Q1. We all just need to be there, you know, to show that these things can happen to Red Bull too. And yesterday is the best example.


Q: (Alex Kalinauckas – Autosport) Question to Carlos, please. Just about what you've seen of Charles this weekend. You said yesterday he was on it right from the start on FP1. You said just then a very solid weekend. What's he been like out of the car from what you've seen? Do you think he had a plan to keep cool if he got pole position? Because he seems to be really trying to rein it in after all his heartbreak of recent years. Thanks.
CS: From my side, I've seen the same Charles that I've seen any other year in Monaco. Obviously, it's your home race, so you obviously can tell he's a very busy man when he's in Monaco. But nothing different. He's a guy that he's always been super quick around Monaco. He has performed exceptionally well. The only thing I saw different is that he seemed to be in Q3 run two already in FP1, Q3 run two mode. And yeah, I had my moments trying to get to that level of pushing and then I lost confidence. And then while we are normally within half a tenth of each other, this week in those two, three moments in FP1 and FP2 it just put me a step behind in confidence and I couldn't quite get close enough in quali.


Q: (Niharika Ghorpade – Sportskeeda) Carlos, you mentioned earlier that Red Bull are still the favourites, but we spoke to Max earlier and he says that there could be more tracks where Red Bull could struggle, probably not as much as this. So the other two drivers can add in but is it any encouragement that now your teams finally have an opportunity to fight for this championship? And what does that feel like?
CS: I think we will have… I think Ferrari we will have our opportunities in these sort of tracks. I think McLaren will have their opportunities, but when I talk about a normal track we can talk about maybe a Barcelona. Canada, I think is quite specific but a Barcelona or any European truck, where I consider it to be a normal track, I still think Red Bull will be favourites, but I don't think they'll dominate like they used to do. And I think that's good news for the championship. And it's just worth being within a tenth or two in quali, that even if they're favourites, they cannot afford to do any mistakes. And that's where both Ferrari and McLaren, we can capitalise, which is a position that in Bahrain Race 1, no one was there to be there.