Q: Oscar, you have to be happy with that. A podium in Monaco. It's the dream race. Obviously, so close to the win. How was it out there for you?
Oscar PIASTRI: Yeah, tricky race. You know, the pace at the beginning was incredibly slow and I had one little half look before the tunnel, but yeah, I didn't have... Well, I didn't have a small enough car to fit into a gap. So yeah, thanks to the whole team. It's been a great weekend all round. And yeah, nice to finally put a result on the board. We've been very strong for the last few weekends, but didn't really have the results to show for it. So nice to have a podium, and what better place?
 
Q: Yeah, it was really fun watching you at the first start, having a go at a few places around the lap, and your aggression showed there. And we thought you were going to have a good go, but it didn't quite come off. But it's been a great weekend for you, hasn't it? Does it make you think, ‘oh, those little things in qualifying would have made a big difference’?
OP: Yeah, I mean, it does. But to be honest, Charles has been mega all weekend. And, you know, they've been quick from the very first lap. And I think it would have taken something pretty special in quali to outdo him. The opportunity was almost there, but it would have taken probably the best lap of my life. So I'm happy with P2. A good result for the team again and yeah, very, very happy.
 
Q: Congrats. Enjoy the celebrations.
OP: Thank you. Cheers.


Q: Oscar, let's start with you. Many congratulations. Your third podium in Formula 1. Just how much did you enjoy those podium celebrations, first of all?
OP: Tell you what, I think I slept longer than I did last night, waiting for Charles just now. No, I'm very, very happy. Yeah, third podium in F1 certainly doesn't get old. So, no, very happy to have it here in Monaco, especially, you know, if there's one podium apart from your home podium that you want to stand on, it's probably here. So, very, very pleased for the whole team. I think especially for our side of the garage, it's been a promising few weekends now and nice to finally get a good result out of it. So very, very happy.
 
Q: And in terms of your battle with Charles, was there any moment in the race when you attempted to send it?
OP: I had an attempt about 10 or 15 laps in, into Turn 8. We were going pretty slow. I think at one point we were going slower than Formula 2. You know, when you're going that slow, you've got a fair few options. But I kind of knew that once I showed my hand in where I was going to try and overtake, that he would probably be wise to it from there. So I managed to get very close in Turn 7, one lap. I tried to show the nose in Turn 8 but he reacted just quick enough, so after that point I knew I was going to be very limited on options.
 
Q: And how was the performance of the car? You were carrying a bit of floor damage after your moment with Carlos at the original start?
OP: Yeah, I mean, it was OK. I think for the first half of the race, it was impossible to tell what the penalty of that was. I think towards the end, probably a combination of trying to keep the pace of the race reasonably quick, plus the floor, yeah, just struggled a little bit towards the end, but overall pretty happy with it. And yeah, the last 10 laps or so, I was pretty happy we were in Monaco.
 
Q: And you said a moment ago it's been a good few races for you now, but can we throw it forward? What does this weekend say about McLaren's competitive position in Formula 1? Do you think now you're a factor? You can win every race going forward if the cards fall for you?
OP: I think so. I think it's been three very different circuits in the past three races, and we've been competitive at all of them. Miami was probably one of our worst circuits before this year. Imola has always been kind to us, but we had a very strong weekend there, and here's been… Let's say our car's never been the strongest in the slow corners, and this weekend we've been very quick again. So I think we can be confident wherever we go. I feel like we don't have to rely on the high-speed circuits like we did last year to get our results, which is a very exciting thing to have going forward. And, yeah, I think the pecking order is as tight as it's ever been, especially this weekend. Going into qualifying, I think we thought that there could be any one of four teams on pole, which I don't think we've been able to say for a while. So, I think we can definitely be in the fight every weekend.


Q: (Matt Coch – SpeedCafe) Oscar, Carlos spoke about his immediate reaction and feelings in the car at Turn 1, what were yours? And also during the red flag when the team was ripping a sidepod off and getting the hot glue gun out on the floor, what were you thinking at that point?
OP: I definitely felt the touch at Turn 1 and at that part of the car, it's such a sensitive part. The team told me how much downforce I was losing before we tried to fix it and it was a pretty big number. I don't know what we managed to get it down to but yeah, obviously the length of the red flag helped us out quite a lot there. And being in Monaco, it's probably the one track where having damage doesn't hurt you as much. So, yeah, it was a very, very small touch. But with these cars, especially with the floor being so sensitive to the downforce it generates, it can ruin your race very easily. So, yeah, I was very happy we could try and fix it.